
= 20 - EC - ECDH vs ECDSA


== SO answer - https://security.stackexchange.com/a/211484/226177

Something that no answer so far addressed directly is that your questions mixes several more or less unrelated names
together as if these were equivalent alternatives to each other which isn't really the case.

ECDH and ECDSA are just names of cryptographic methods.

*ECDH* is a key exchange method that two parties can use to negotiate a secure key over an insecure communication
channel. It's a variation of the DH (Diffie-Hellman) key exchange method. ECDH stands for Elliptic-curve Diffieâ€“Hellman.
Yet ECDH is just a method, that means you cannot just use it with one specific elliptic curve, you can use it with many
different elliptic curves.

*ECDSA* is a signature algorithm that can be used to sign a piece of data in such a way, that any change to the data
would cause signature validation to fail, yet an attacker would not be able to correctly re-sign data after such a
change. It is a variation of DSA (Digital Signature Algorithm). ECDSA stands for Elliptic Curve Digital Signature
Algorithm. Also ECDSA only describes a method which can be used with different elliptic curves.

The security of ECDH and ECDSA thus depends on two factors:

* How secure is the method itself? If the method isn't secure, the best curve in the word wouldn't change that.
* How secure is the curve being used? If the curve isn't secure, it won't play a role if the method theoretically is.

Curve25519 is the name of a specific elliptic curve. Other curves are named Curve448, P-256, P-384, and P-521.

Ed25519 is the name of a concrete variation of EdDSA. When performing EdDSA using SHA-512 and Curve25519, this variation
is named Ed25519. EdDSA is a signature algorithm, just like ECDSA.

So if an implementation just says it uses ECDH for key exchange or ECDSA to sign data, without mentioning any specific
curve, you can usually assume it will be using the NIST curves (P-256, P-384, or P-512), yet the implementation should
actually always name the used curve explicitly.

To answer your question about security: ECDH and ECDSA have pretty much been proven to be conceptional secure key
exchange and signing methods, thus the security of ECDH and ECDSA pretty much depends on the fact if someone finds a way
how to break elliptic cryptography in general (little likely but not impossible) or to find a flaw within the curves
being used (more likely).

The reason why some people prefer Curve25519 over the NIST standard curves is the fact, that the NIST hasn't clearly
documented why it has chosen theses curves in favor of existing alternatives. The generic statement "_The curves were
ostensibly chosen for optimal security and implementation efficiency_" sounds a lot like marketing balderdash and won't
convince cryptographic experts.

The NIST also standardized a random number generator based elliptic curve cryptography (Dual_EC_DRB) in 2006 and the New
York times claimed (after reviewing the memos leaked by Edward Snowden) that it was the NSA influencing the NIST to
standardize this specific random number generator. A huge weaknesses has been discovered in that generator and it is
believed that it is an intentional backdoor placed by the NSA to be able to break TLS encryption based on that
generator. The ANSI apparently discovered the weakness when Dual_EC_DRB was first submitted to them but despite being
aware how to avoid it, they did neither improve the algorithm, nor did they publicize the weaknesses, so it is believed
that they weren't allowed to (gag order). When the weakness became publicly known, the standard was withdrawn in 2014.

With that background knowledge, of course, people started to wonder if maybe the source of the mysterious NIST curve
parameters is in fact also the NSA as maybe these curves have also hidden weaknesses that are not publicly known yet but
the NSA may know about them and thus be able to break cryptography based on these curves. There is no evidence for that
claim, not even a presumptive evidence but it surely seems possible and more realistic than a fairy tale. That's why
people lost trust into these curves and switched to alternatives where it is highly unlikely, that these were influenced
by any secret service around the world.

Curve25519 was published by the German-American mathematician and cryptologist Daniel J. Bernstein in 2005, who also
designed the famous Salsa20 stream cipher and the now widely used ChaCha20 variant of it. He also invented the Poly1305
message authentication. Google decided that ChaCha20 in combination with Poly1305 is a secure alternative to be used in
TLS after RC4 had to be removed because the algorithm has been broken. It requires much less computation power than
using the AES block chipher (very useful for mobile devices as it saves battery runtime), yet is believed to provide
comparable security. ChaCha20/Poly1305 is standardized in RFC 7905 and widely used today in TLS client-server
communication as of today. So if Bernstein was a NSA spy, which is very unlikely, we'd all be doomed already as then TLS
as it is often used today would probably be useless to protect data from the eyes of secret services.
